Title: Configuring OpenVPN server on RTN66U
Date: 2014-05-01
Category: blog
Tags: howto,tomato,network,openvpn,security,vpn
Slug: 2014-05-01-easyrsa
Author: arnulf

The router firmware Tomato, see previous post [RT-N66u with Tomato by Shibby firmware](2014-04-17-tomato), can act as an [OpenVPN] server.

Using open [Wi-Fi] access points can be very useful and necessary, but it is inherently insecure. Using the router as an [OpenVPN] server can increase your privacy and security when you are on the go. By creating an encrypted [VPN] connection back home to the router, you don't only get protection from nosy eavesdroppers but you get access to all your equipment behind the router at home as well.

For [OpenVPN] to work we need to create our own [CA] for signing both server, the router, and optionally client certificates. This notes will only show how to create a server certificate and configure the router with user name and password authentication.

## Preparations, create CA

Install necessary software. Although haveged, is not required, see [Better entropy with haveged](2014-04-29-haveged).

```bash
sudo apt-get install easy-rsa haveged
```

Create a work directory for [OpenVPN] [CA]. Take care to protect this directory and the files under it. 

```
make-cadir «yourdomain»
```

Enter your [CA] directory.

```bash
cd «yourdomain»
```

Edit the `vars` file and change the following variables to something more sensible for you.

```bash
export KEY_COUNTRY="US"
export KEY_PROVINCE="CA"
export KEY_CITY="SanFrancisco"
export KEY_ORG="Funston-Fort"
export KEY_EMAIL="me@myhost.mydomain"
```

Source the variables into current bash session.

```bash
source ./vars
```

Do a initial clean.

```
./clean-all 
```

Create your [CA] public and private key.

```
./build-ca
```

Generate your [Diffie–Hellman] parameters.

```
./build-dh
```

Create your routers public and private key.

```
./build-key-server «yourrouter»
```

Listing of folder `keys` should look something like this now.

    ca.crt  dh2048.pem  serial            «yourrouter».csr
    ca.key  index.txt   «yourrouter».crt  «yourrouter».key

Now we are ready for configureing the [OpenVPN] server in the router running [Tomato by Shibby].

## Configuring OpenVPN in Tomato 

1. Log into the rouers admin interface.
2. Go to the menu **VPN Tunneling → OpenVPN Server**.
3. Select **Server 1**.
4. Leave the **Basic** tab with the defaults.
5. In the **Advanced** tab.  
    1. Check **Allow User/Pass Auth**
    2. Check **Allow Only User/Pass(Without cert)**
    3. Create users and set corresponding passwords.
6. Go to the **Key** tab.
    1. Paste content of `ca.crt` into **Certificate Authority**.
    2. Paste content of `«yourrouter».crt` into **Server Certificate**.
    3. Paste content of `«yourrouter».key` into **Server Key**.
    4. Paste content of `dh2048.pem` into **Diffie Hellman parameters**- 
7. Scroll to bottom of page and **Save**.
8. Press **Start Now**.

That's it. Change listening port under **Basic** as needed. If you use port `80` or `443` and protocol `TCP` you will be able to connect through the most restrictive open access points. Be aware that some home [ISP]s tend to block common port as `80`.

## Clients

### Network Manager

Now you can configure [OpenVPN] on your computer. Remember to install the correct plugin, `network-manager-openvpn`.

```bash
sudo apt-get install network-manager-openvpn
```
### Android

Easy to use [OpenVPN] client for Android is [OpenVPN for Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=de.blinkt.openvpn).



[CA]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_authority "Certificate Authority"
[OpenVPN]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenVPN "OpenVPN"
[Wi-Fi]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wifi "Wi-Fi"
[VPN]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vpn "Virtual Private Network"
[Diffie–Hellman]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffie-Helmann "Diffie–Hellman key exchange"
[Tomato by Shibby]:  http://tomato.groov.pl
[ISP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Service_Provider "Internet Servicev Provider"
