Title: fio - flexible I/O tester
Date: 2014-12-15
Category: blog
Tags: io, benchmark, howto
Slug: 2014-12-15-fio
Author: arnulf

From man page: `fio` *is a tool that will spawn a number of threads or processes doing a particular type of I/O action as specified by the user. The typical use of fio is to write a job file matching the I/O load one wants to simulate.*

This example only show how to use `fio` to make reproduceable test on a file system. For me it's been useful to catch changes in I/O throughput before and after a system has gone into production. Buy running the same tests on all systems the numbers are comparable. 

All parameter numbers are examples, define your own test according to what you want to measure. 

## Installing fio

    apt-get install fio

## Running fio

* Change `bsrange` to the block size range you want to test. 
* `numjobs` is the number of simultanious read/write threads.
* `size` is the working file size.
* If you want to test a read heavy load, use `rwmixread` with a percentage of reads versus writes..

```bash
for i in read write readwrite randread randwrite randrw; do fio --name=fio  --write_bw_log=$i --write_iops_log=$i --write_lat_log=$i --ioengine=sync --size=10G --runtime=60 --rw=$i --norandommap --refill_buffers --randrepeat=0  --iodepth=1 --direct=1 --numjobs=8 --group_reporting --bsrange=4k-4k; done
```

## Generating I/O plots

```bash
fio2gnuplot -i -g
```

For me is the most interesting plot is **compare-result-2Dsmooth.png**.

## Generating bandwidth plots

Testing bandwidth is better to do with a larger block size. I usually set a block size between 64k to 1m. 

```bash
for i in read write readwrite randread randwrite randrw; do fio --name=fio  --write_bw_log=$i --write_iops_log=$i --write_lat_log=$i --ioengine=sync --size=10G --runtime=60 --rw=$i --norandommap --refill_buffers --randrepeat=0  --iodepth=1 --direct=1 --numjobs=8 --group_reporting --bsrange=64k-1m; done
```

Generate the bandwidth plot.

```bash
fio2gnuplot -b -g
```

For me is the most interesting plot is **compare-result-2Dsmooth.png**.

