Title: Design an online ransomware safe backup with restic
Date: 2019-09-11
Category: blog
Tags: howto, restic, rclone, security, ssh
Slug: 2019-09-11-restic
Author: arnulf

[rclone]: https://rclone.org "Rclone - rsync for cloud storage."
[restic]: https://restic.net "Backups done right!"
[ransomware]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ransomware "Ransomware is a type of malicious software from cryptovirology that threatens to publish the victim's data or perpetually block access to it unless a ransom is paid."
[deduplication]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_deduplication "In computing, data deduplication is a specialized data compression technique for eliminating duplicate copies of repeating data. Related and somewhat synonymous terms are intelligent compression and single-instance storage."
[YubiKey]: https://www.yubico.com
[immutable]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immutable_object "An immutable object is an object whose state cannot be modified after it is created."

The only way to be safe for [ransomware], except for keeping a offline backup, is to have a [immutable] online backup.

[restic] is a [deduplication] backup sofware, designed for ease of use and security. [Rclone][rclone] is a versatile program for syncing data between a huge variety of protocols and cloud providers. What is especially nifty is that *restic* can use *rclone* as a backend, and by that extend *restic* destination into most cloud providers. 

## Problem

Setting up an automated backup from one macine is no problem. This can be done quite easily with

    restic -p password_file -r sftp://user@destination/srv/backups init

Backups is then done with

    restic -p password_file -r sftp://user@destination/srv/backups backup /srv/backmeup

If a malicious actor has access to the source machine, they will have read and write access to the backup on the destination. To avoid giving the malicious actor write access to already existing backups, we need to ensure that existing backups on the destination never is changed. This is done by making the destination immutable. When data is written, it cannot be changed later.

## Solution

This can be solved in couple of ways

1. Use a immutable backend, in example immutable object storage in the cloud.
0. Make any destination immutable by relying all traffic through a secured *rclone* proxy with the `--append-only` forced.

## Design, rely traffic through proxy

```
     source               intermediate                destination
+---------------+       +--------------+  chosen     +-----------+
|               |  SSH  | rclone       |  transport  | favorite  |
| /srv/backmeup | ----> | append only  | ----------> | cloud     |
|               |       | rely         |             | storage   |
+---------------+       +--------------+             +-----------+
```

## Configure

### On *source*

1. Create a SSH key on the *source* without a password.

        ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -f .ssh/id_ed25519 -N ''

0. Cat the newly created key `.ssh/id_ed25519.pub`

        ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIAS2qJU7yIDRVY9cgjyJ0tGM32aB/aaeSwjQ0O/RTN6d

### On *intermediate*

1. Secure the *intermediate* server as you see fit. Do **not allow** unrestricted SSH from the *source*.

0. Log in as your user, in this example `user`.

0. Create a *rclone* profile, in this case it's called *myprofile*.

        rclone config

0. Test the profile.

        rclone myprofile: ls

0. Allow *source* to SSH into *intermediate* and run a very limited *rclone* which only may append data to *myprofile*. Edit `.ssh/authorized_keys`.

        restrict,command="rclone serve restic --stdio --append-only myprofile:backups" ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIAS2qJU7yIDRVY9cgjyJ0tGM32aB/aaeSwjQ0O/RTN6d

### Back on *source*

1. Create a unique password for the backup. Take note of this password! You will not be able to restore without it.

        apg -m 32 | head -1 > restic.pwd
        chmod 400 restic.pwd
        cat restic.pwd

0. Initiate *restic* backup repository.

        restic -o rclone.program='ssh user@intermediate' -p restic.pwd -r rclone: init

0. Back up your data.

        restic -o rclone.program='ssh user@intermediate' -p restic.pwd -r rclone: backup /srv/backmeup

0. Create a job that run *restic* regularly.

You can use all *restic* commands as normal, except repair and cleanup commands.

## Conclusion

Now you have a *source* which backs up data online.

If the *source* get compromised, the malicious actor cannot

* Delete or change old backups.
* Know final destination of backups.

## Caveats

* *source* should newer have normal SSH into *intermediate*
* Access to *intermediate* should be restricted. 2FA is recommended, example [YubiKey].


###### vim: set syn=markdown spell spl=en:
