---
title: "Raspberry Pi 4 - Ubuntu 20.04 w/Btrfs root"
date: 2021-04-23T21:18:52+02:00
draft: false
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - pi
  - btrfs
---

How to convert a root filesystem on a [Raspberry Pi 4 b](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/) running [Ubuntu 20.04](https://ubuntu.com/download/raspberry-pi) 64 bit to [Btrfs](https://btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/) in a few simple steps.

<!--more-->

## Why

First, why should I care about doing this.

* Btrfs is SSD-aware, even on a SD card. The copy on write filesystem will ensure that your writes will be spread out and decrease wear leveling.
* You can enable a cpu friendly, [zstd](https://github.com/facebook/zstd), compression that decreases the amount of data written to your SD card.

## How

1. Flash Ubuntu on the SD card as usual.
0. Boot once as usual and let the filsystem expand to the space of the SD card.
0. Log into the Raspberry Pi.
0. Tell boot to read from a Btrfs filesystem on next boot
    ```bash
    sudo sed -i 's/ext4/btrfs/' /boot/firmware/cmdline.txt
    ```
0. Update `/etc/fstab` with new fileystem, and ensure minimum writes to SD card.
    ```bash
    sudo sed -E -i 's|(.*)ext4.*|\1btrfs compress=zstd:1,noatime,nodiratime 0 0|' /etc/fstab
    ```
0. Shutdown your system.
    ```bash
    sudo shutdown -h now
    ```
0. Take out your SD card and put it into your **Linux** workstation or laptop. Convert the filesystem on the SD card. If the SD cards `ext4` partition are `/dev/sda2` then the command will be as follows. Let the command finish.
    ```bash
    sudo btrfs-convert -p /dev/sda2
    ```
0. Put the SD card back in the Raspberry Pi and boot. Voila! You have a Btrfs root filesystem.
0. Log into the Rasberry Pi for some cleanup.
0. Remove the old `ext2` backup.
    ```bash
    sudo btrfs sub del /ext2_saved
    ```
0. Defrag and compress already existing OS.
    ```btrfs
    sudo btrfs fi def -czstd -r -v /
    ```

Congratulation! Now you have a Btrfs root filesystem with compression. Writes will take less space, and wear leveling is down. Note that you also have saved space by running a `df -h /`. Enjoy an SD card that will last longer than you are used to.

<!---
vim: set spell spelllang=en:
-->




