---
title: "Luks decryption with clevis and TPM2 on Fedora"
date: 2022-04-08
draft: false
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - howto
  - security
---

[`clevis`]: https://github.com/latchset/clevis
[archlinux]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Trusted_Platform_Module#systemd-cryptenroll
[Kowalski7cc]: https://kowalski7cc.xyz/blog/luks2-tpm2-clevis-fedora31
[Trusted Platform Module]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Platform_Module

Why should you encrypt your disc in the first place? It's for your own privacy. It's to ensure that personal data doesn't go astray.

<!--more-->

Examples when your data may go astray.

* You sell your computer.
* Give a disc to a family member or a friend.
* You put the disc in the recycling bin.
* Someone steals your computer.

From the Github repo: *[`clevis`][] is a pluggable framework for automated decryption. It can be used to provide automated decryption of data or even automated unlocking of LUKS volumes.*

The idea is to automatic unlock the disc during boot without typing a password by binding the disk to "your" computer and storing a key in the [Trusted Platform Module][], TPM.

## Installation

### Fedora

```bash
sudo dnf install -y clevis clevis-dracut clevis-udisks2
```
 
## Setup

Preparations before you begin.

* Turn off boot from USB and network in BIOS.
* Optionally turn on secure boot in BIOS.
* Set a strong BIOS password.

### Bind pin to disk

```bash
sudo clevis luks bind -d /dev/nvme0n1p3 tpm2 '{"pcr_bank":"sha256","pcr_ids":"0,1,5,7"}'
```

Automated disc encryption will fail if

* `0.` UEFI firmware has changed.
* `1.` Firmware configuration has changed.
* `5.` Bootloader has changed, including GPT.
* `7.` Secure boot has changed. 

Platform Configuration Registers (PCR) [table](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4302-6584-9_12/tables/1).
 
### List pins bound to disk

```bash
sudo clevis luks list -d /dev/nvme0n1p3
```

### Unbind pin from disk

```bash
sudo clevis luks unbind -d /dev/nvme0n1p3 -s 1
```

## Remove all acces to the disk

Before you give away your disk or computer. You can erase all access to your data with a simple command.

```bash
sudo cryptsetup erase /dev/nvme0n1p3
```

## References

* Always good guides at [archlinux][] wiki.
* [Kowalski7cc][] has a good write-up.
* [TCG PC Client Platform TPM Profile (PTP) Specification](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/resource/pc-client-platform-tpm-profile-ptp-specification/).

<!---
vim: set spell spelllang=en:
-->
